"> > IT'S 1 :55
A.M., SEPTEMBER 5,"
"1944, AND I'VE
BEEN ON THE TRAIN"
JUST 45 MINUTES.
THE PORTER PROBABLY THINKS THAT
I'VE MADE AT LEAST 20 TRIPS
"ACROSS THE COUNTRY BEFORE,"
BECAUSE I'M ACTING AS THOUGH I'M
A WOMAN OF THE WORLD.
[TRAIN WHISTLE SOUNDS]
"> > IT'S THE FALL OF 1944, AND"
20-YEAR-OLD DORIS BLUMBERG IS ON
A 5-DAY JOURNEY TO CALIFORNIA.
HER DESTINATION IS THE MUNRO
ARMY BASE WHERE SHE'LL WORK AS A
MATHEMATICIAN FOR THE UNITED
STATES ARMY ON A TOP-SECRET
PROJECT TO PERFECT PRECISION
AERIAL BOMBING.
"BACK HOME IN PHILADELPHIA, HER"
TWIN SISTER SHIRLEY IS ALSO AN
"ARMY MATHEMATICIAN, WORKING AT"
THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
AS A BALLISTICS CALCULATOR.
JUST A FEW YEARS EARLIER THESE
BRIGHT YOUNG WOMEN MAY HAVE
FACED LOW-PAYING JOBS AS
SCHOOLTEACHERS OR SECRETARIES.
"BUT IN A WORLD AT WAR, THEIR"
MATHEMATICAL SKILLS PROVED
INVALUABLE TO THE UNITED STATES
MILITARY.
LIKE THOUSANDS OF OTHER WOMEN
"ACROSS THE COUNTRY, DORIS AND"
SHIRLEY HAD BEEN RECRUITED TO
WORK FOR THE WAR EFFORT.
BUT UNLIKE THEIR BLUE-COLLAR
"SISTERS, THESE
''ROSIES'' WORKED"
"AS HUMAN COMPUTERS,"
USING THEIR MATH SKILLS TO
"COMPUTE SHELL TRAJECTORIES,"
"CREATE BALLISTICS TABLES, AND"
"SERVE AS PROGRAMMERS ON ENIAC,"
THE FIRST ELECTRONIC COMPUTER.
WHEN THEY SIGNED ON FOR THE
"DURATION, THESE YOUNG WOMEN"
HOPED THAT THEIR SECRET WORK
WOULD HELP WIN WORLD WAR II.
THEY DID NOT KNOW HOW IT WOULD
"CHANGE THEIR OWN LIVES, NOR"
COULD THEY KNOW THAT THEY WERE
HELPING TO USHER IN THE COMPUTER
AGE THAT WOULD CHANGE THE WORLD.
"> > WELL, GREY'S FERRY WAS NOT"
THE GARDEN SPOT OF PHILADELPHIA.
IT WAS NOT A BEAUTIFUL AREA TO
GROW UP.
IT WAS AT THE TIME WE WERE
GROWING UP PREDOMINANTLY
CATHOLIC. A MIXTURE OF ITALIAN
"AND IRISH, MAINLY."
> > THERE WAS A SYNAGOGUE 5
BLOCKS AWAY AT 23rd AND WHARTON
"STREET, AND A NUMBER OF THE"
PROFESSIONAL PEOPLE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD--
THE PHARMACIST AND THE DOCTOR
"ACROSS THE STREET,
THE DENTIST A"
FEW BLOCKS AWAY--
MOST OF THOSE PEOPLE WERE
"JEWISH, BUT WE DIDN'T FEEL ANY"
DISCRIMINATION IN OUR
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I DON'T THINK THAT THERE WAS ANY
MAJOR PROBLEM WITH BEING JEWISH
IN THE ALL-CATHOLIC
NEIGHBORHOOD. NOW I ALWAYS SAY
''WE'' BECAUSE AS
YOU KNOW I HAVE
A TWIN SISTER AND WE DID
EVERYTHING TOGETHER.
SO WE WENT TO A GIRLS' HIGH FROM
ORDINARY JUNIOR HIGH.
> > GIRLS' HIGH WAS A PLEASURE.
ONE TEACHER I REMEMBER--
"MISS CLARK--WAS PROBABLY, I"
"THINK, ONE OF
THE BEST TEACHERS"
I'VE EVER HAD.
"AND SHE STARTED A MATH CLUB,"
WHICH SHE INVITED BOTH OF US TO
JOIN. SO WE WOULD DO MATH GAMES
"AFTER SCHOOL WITH
THE MATH CLUB,"
AND IT WAS JUST A LOT OF FUN.
> > I GREW UP IN MISSOURI ON A
"FARM, AND MY
FATHER WAS A SCHOOL"
"TEACHER AND A FARMER, AND WE"
WERE VERY POOR.
"I MEAN, IF I HAD A QUARTER, I"
HAD A LOT OF MONEY.
WE GREW MOST OF OUR OWN FOOD AND
JUST BOUGHT STAPLES AT THE
STORE. AND THE LITTLE TOWN OF
"ALANTHUS, THEY USED TO HAVE"
"SILENT MOVIES,
AND THEY USED TO"
PLAY IT UP ON THE WALL AT ONE OF
"THE STORES, AND THEY JUST HAD"
PLANKS SO YOU'D SIT AND YOU'D GO
ON SATURDAY NIGHT AND SEE THE
SILENT MOVIE.
> > MY MOTHER WAS A STAY-AT-HOME
"MOM, WHICH MOST WOMEN WERE IN"
"THOSE DAYS, AND
MY FATHER WAS A"
"TRAVELING SALESMAN, AND HE"
TRAVELED FROM BOSTON TO
WASHINGTON AND OUT TO LANCASTER
AND YORK.
IN THE SUMMERTIME I WOULD GO
WITH HIM SOMETIMES.
"BUT BEING RAISED, I GUESS IN"
"THAT HOUSEHOLD,
I JUST KNEW THAT"
I HAD TO GO TO COLLEGE.
"I MEAN, IT WAS EXPECTED, AND I"
KNEW I WAS GOING TO GO.
"> > NOW, MY MOTHER OF COURSE"
DIDN'T HAVE ANY FORMAL
EDUCATION. ONLY WENT THROUGH
EIGHTH GRADE.
SHE NEVER WENT TO HIGH SCHOOL AT
ALL. BUT SHE WAS AS ENCOURAGING
"AS EVERYBODY ELSE, YOU KNOW."
"''THIS IS A NEW
WORLD,'' YOU KNOW."
''YOU CAN'T MAKE
IT IN THIS WORLD
"WITHOUT AN EDUCATION,"
AND I DIDN'T HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY. I WISH I HAD HAD
"THE OPPORTUNITY,
BUT YOU DO HAVE"
SO THERE IS NO"
CHOICE. THIS IS WHAT YOU DO.''
> > I NEVER WANTED TO LIVE ON A
FARM. I NEVER WANTED TO MARRY A
FARMER. I NEVER WANTED TO HAVE
KIDS. I WASN'T--
AND MY AUNT GRETCHEN WHO DIDN'T
GET MARRIED UNTIL SHE WAS 40 AND
DIDN'T HAVE ANY CHILDREN WAS MY
"MODEL, 'CAUSE SHE USED TO COME"
HOME IN THE SUMMER AND SHE WORE
MAKEUP AND HAD TO HEM-MARK
"HER SUITS, AND
THAT'S HOW I WENT"
TO COLLEGE WAS AUNT GRETCHEN.
I BORROWED THE GRAND TOTAL OF
$400 TO GO TO COLLEGE.
I KNEW I WANTED TO DO SOMETHING
LIKE AUNT GRETCHEN.
I WANTED TO GET OUT OF MISSOURI
"AND I WANTED TO
GO TO SOMEPLACE,"
SOME BIG PLACE.
> > WE INTERRUPT THIS BROADCAST
TO BRING YOU THIS IMPORTANT
BULLETIN...
"> > WE WERE
PLAYING BRIDGE, AND"
"SOMEBODY RAN IN
AND SAID, ''JAPAN"
IS BOMBING PEARL HARBOR!'' SO WE
ALL JUMPED UP AND WE RAN IN AND
"WE ALL LISTENED TO THE RADIO,"
AND OF COURSE ROOSEVELT DECLARED
WAR THE NEXT DAY.
> > MEMBERS OF
THE SENATE AND THE
"HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,"
"YESTERDAY, DECEMBER
7, 1941 , A"
DATE THAT WILL LIVE IN INFAMY...
> > IT WAS THE BEGINNING OF
PEOPLE WAKING UP TO THE FACT
THAT YOU CAN'T SIT BY AND LET
EVERYBODY ELSE DO YOUR JOB FOR
YOU.
"> > THE UNITED
STATES, ONCE WORLD"
"WAR II BREAKS OUT, IS ABLE TO"
TURN TO INDUSTRY IN THIS
"COUNTRY, AND THEY WERE VERY"
READILY ABLE TO TURN THEIR
PRODUCTION FROM PEACE TIME
SERVICES TO WARTIME PRODUCTION
"VERY, VERY, VERY QUICKLY."
> > I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT SURPRISES PEOPLE ABOUT
"WOMEN IN, SAY THE TWENTIES AND"
THIRTIES IS THAT THEY WERE
GENERALLY BETTER EDUCATED THAN
THEIR MALE COUNTERPARTS AT BOTH
THE HIGH SCHOOL AND AT THE
COLLEGE LEVEL REPRESENTED ABOUT
"HALF OF THE
STUDENTS. NOW, WHERE"
IT WAS DIFFERENT FOR WOMEN IS
THE RANGE OF PROFESSIONAL AND
OCCUPATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
"> > DURING THE WAR, THE"
OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN EXPAND
NUMERICALLY AND THEY ALSO CHANGE
IN TERMS OF WHAT'S AVAILABLE TO
THEM. THERE IS AN INCREASE OF
ABOUT 50% MORE WOMEN IN THE
WORKFORCE BETWEEN 1940 AND 1945.
> > SO WORLD WAR II WAS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MANY WOMEN TO
LEAVE THEIR HOMES AND TAKE ON
JOBS IN A VARIETY OF INDUSTRIES.
THE AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY--
"YOU KNOW, WE ALL
KNOW THE IMAGE"
OF ROSIE THE RIVETER.
FOR WOMEN WITH MATHEMATICAL
"TRAINING, BALLISTICS COMPUTING"
WAS A JOB NEWLY OPENED TO WOMEN
BECAUSE MEN WERE RECRUITED FOR
WARTIME SERVICE.
> > FOR US A COMPUTER IS A
THING--
AN OBJECT THAT PERFORMS TASKS
"BOTH MUNDANE AND
AMAZING, BUT IN"
1942 A COMPUTER WASN'T A
"MACHINE, IT WAS A PERSON."
THE PROFESSION OF HUMAN
COMPUTING CAN BE TRACED BACK TO
THE 1 7th CENTURY IN OCCUPATIONS
"SUCH AS ASTRONOMY,
ARCHITECTURE,"
AND ENGINEERING.
"BY THE END OF
THE 19th CENTURY,"
THE FORMAL WORD
''COMPUTER'' WAS A
PROFESSIONAL TITLE APPLIED TO
PEOPLE WHO SPENT THEIR LIVES
COMPUTING.
WHETHER CALCULATING ASTRONOMICAL
TABLES OR FACTORING MISSILE
"TRAJECTORIES,
MATHEMATICS WAS A"
CRUCIAL WEAPON OF THE U.S.
"ARSENAL AND WOMEN, ITS SECRET"
PRACTITIONERS.
> > I GRADUATED FROM WEST
PHILADELPHIA HIGH SCHOOL IN
"1938. I WENT TO TEMPLE, AND I"
WENT INTO THE SECONDARY
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT AND
GRADUATED FROM THERE IN '42
KNOWING I DID NOT WANT TO BE A
TEACHER AND LOOKING FOR WHATEVER
ELSE I COULD FIND.
"I MINORED IN
BUSINESS, SO I DID"
LEARN ADDING MACHINE.
"IF ALL ELSE
FAILED, I COULD GET"
A JOB IN AN OFFICE BECAUSE I HAD
SHORTHAND AND TYPING AND THAT TO
"FALL BACK ON, BUT
WHEN I GOT OUT"
"OF SCHOOL, THE WAR WAS ON, AND"
THERE WERE OTHER OPPORTUNITIES.
"> > WELL, THE CALL CAME"
"ORIGINALLY FROM DR. HART, FROM"
"DR. OLIVE ELY
HART. AS I RECALL,"
SHE'S THE ONE WHO CALLED US IN
AND TOLD US THAT ALL THE
PRINCIPALS OF ALL THE HIGH
SCHOOLS HAD RECEIVED THIS
MESSAGE THAT THE WAR EFFORT AND
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE WAS
LOOKING FOR YOUNG STUDENTS WHO
HAD ABILITY IN MATH FOR A WAR
PROGRAM THAT WOULD BE A GREAT
CONTRIBUTION TO THE COUNTRY.
"> > YEAH, WE KNEW WE HAD TO DO"
IT. WE KNEW WE HAD TO HELP OUT.
IF WE WERE SENDING OUR TROOPS
"OVER THERE TO
RISK THEIR LIVES,"
WE CERTAINLY HAD TO HELP OUT ON
THIS END IN WHATEVER CAPACITY WE
HAD SOME SKILLS IN.
> > DURING WORLD WAR II THERE
WERE A WHOLE LOT OF BALLISTICS
LABS THAT WERE OPERATING--
"EAST COAST, WEST COAST, MIDDLE"
OF THE COUNTRY.
"REMEMBER, WORLD WAR II IS A"
"TOTAL WAR, AND IT BECAME A"
"NATIONAL EFFORT, SO ANYWHERE"
THAT A UNIVERSITY HAD A
"MATHEMATICS
DEPARTMENT, THEY HAD"
FOLKS WORKING THESE TABLES.
"> > DURING WORLD
WAR I, CONGRESS"
ACQUIRED THOUSANDS OF ACRES OF
MARYLAND FARMLAND TO CREATE
"ABERDEEN PROVING GROUND, THE"
ARMY'S MAJOR SITE FOR BALLISTICS
RESEARCH AND WEAPONS TESTING.
WORLD WAR II BROUGHT INTENSE
DEMANDS FOR UPDATED BALLISTICS
INFORMATION AND THE ORDNANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ABERDEEN COULD NOT
KEEP UP.
THE ARMY CONTRACTED WITH THE
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA TO
ESTABLISH A CLASSIFIED SATELLITE
LAB IN NEARBY PHILADELPHIA AT
THE MOORE SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING.
"SHIRLEY, DORIS, AND MARLYN"
JOINED YOUNG WOMEN FROM ACROSS
THE COUNTRY TO FORM THE
PHILADELPHIA COMPUTING SECTION.
> > WE WORKED IN TWO SHIFTS.
"UH, I DON'T REMEMBER."
"I THINK 7:30 TO 4:00, AND 4:30"
"TO 1 :00, I THINK.
MORE OR LESS."
"AND THERE WERE
3 FLOORS, AND ON"
OUR FLOOR THERE WERE ABOUT 10
WOMEN.
> > WE DID THE PROBLEM-SOLVING
WITH THE HELP OF THESE GREAT BIG
"MARCHANTS AND
MONROES AND GREAT,"
"BIG, UGLY
CALCULATORS THAT MADE"
"A LOT OF NOISE AND MISTAKES,"
TOO. EVERY ONCE IN A WHILE IT
"WOULD SHUT OFF,
AND WE'D HAVE TO"
"START ALL OVER
AGAIN, YOU KNOW?"
THEY WERE PRETTY OLD PIECES OF
EQUIPMENT.
> > WE ASSUME THAT ONCE WE CAN
MATHEMATICALLY DEFINE SOMETHING
THAT WE CAN THEN SOLVE THOSE
MATHEMATICAL EQUATIONS.
AND IT TURNS OUT THERE ARE WHOLE
CLASSES OF PROBLEMS THAT WE
CAN'T EASILY SOLVE.
"WE CAN APPROXIMATE, AND"
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS FALL INTO
THAT CATEGORY.
> > WHAT IS A DIFFERENTIAL
EQUATION AS COMPARED WITH AN
ALGEBRAIC EQUATION?
AN ALGEBRAIC EQUATION IS
SOMETHING WHERE EVERYTHING IS
STANDING STILL EXCEPT THAT
YOU'VE GOT TO PUT YOUR FINGER ON
THE NUMBER YOU WANT WITHIN THAT
MESS. AND SO YOU SUBSTITUTE--
YOU GO THROUGH Xs AND SO ON AND
"SO FORTH, AND
WHEN YOU COME OUT,"
THE ANSWER IS 4. NOTHING CHANGED
WHILE YOU WERE DOING THIS.
"HOWEVER, IN TALKING ABOUT"
PROJECTILES GOING THROUGH THE
"AIR, YOU HAVE THINGS THAT ARE"
CONSTANTLY CHANGING EVEN AS THE
SELF IS MOVING.
"> > THAT'S ADVANCED
MATHEMATICS,"
AND THOSE EQUATIONS WERE SOLVED
IN ORDER TO FIGURE OUT THE
TRAJECTORY OF A BULLET OR A
"BOMB, JUST EXACTLY WHERE IT"
"STARTED, WHAT THE MUZZLE"
VELOCITY WAS OF WHATEVER IT WAS
"THAT WAS SHOOTING THIS BULLET,"
AND WHERE IT WAS GOING.
"WE KNEW THE
DISTANCE, AND WE HAD"
TO FIGURE OUT HOW IT WAS GOING
TO GET THERE TO EXACTLY WHERE IT
"HAD TO LAND, AND THE"
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS WERE PART
OF THE SOLUTION OF THE
TRAJECTORY.
> > THEY WERE INTEGRATING ON A
"DIGITAL BASIS, STEP BY STEP,"
WHAT MY ANALYZER WAS RUNNING BY
"WHEELS AND GEARS
AND, YOU KNOW,"
TURNING AROUND.
> > PENN'S MOORE SCHOOL OF
ENGINEERING OWNED A BUSH
"DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER, ONE OF"
ONLY 5 IN THE WORLD.
"THIS HUGE, MECHANICAL"
CALCULATING MACHINE WAS INVENTED
BY VANNAVAR BUSH AT M.I.T. IN
1925 AND WAS STATE-OF-THE-ART
TECHNOLOGY AT THE MOORE SCHOOL
IN 1942.
DORIS WAS ONE OF 6 FEMALE
COMPUTERS ASSIGNED TO RUN
BALLISTICS PROBLEMS ON THE
MACHINE. A TYPICAL SHELL
TRAJECTORY INVOLVES THOUSANDS OF
INDIVIDUAL CALCULATIONS.
"USING THE DIFFERENTIAL
ANALYZER,"
DORIS' TEAM COULD COMPUTE A
60-SECOND SHELL TRAJECTORY IN
ONLY 15 MINUTES WHILE HUMAN
COMPUTERS SUCH AS SHIRLEY AND
MARLYN WORKED 40 HOURS TO
COMPLETE THE SAME TRAJECTORY.
"> > GIRLS WERE
WORKING IN THERE,"
YES. WE HAD TWO SHIFTS OF THEM.
AND THERE WERE ABOUT 3 GIRLS
"THAT WORKED EACH
SHIFT, SO THAT"
"WHEN WE SET UP A
NEW RUN, IT WAS"
"A RUN DOWN THE
LINE, AND SET UP"
ALL 8 INTEGRATORS TO THE INITIAL
"CONDITIONS, AND THEN WITH A"
"PRAYER, FINGERS CROSSED, YOU"
WENT UP AND PUSHED THE BUTTON
"THAT STARTED A TIME MOTOR, AND"
IT MADE THIS WHOLE MACHINE START
GRINDING.
> > IT WAS RUN BY GEARS.
"THE GEARS WOULD GET LOOSE, AND"
JOE CHAPLINE WOULD CLIMB
UNDERNEATH AND TIGHTEN THE
"GEARS. WHEN WE'D
SAY, ''HEY, JOE,"
THERE'RE TOO MANY MISTAKES
"COMING OUT OF
THIS MACHINE,'' HE"
WOULD GO UNDERNEATH THERE AND
TIGHTEN THE GEARS AND FIGURE OUT
WHAT WAS WRONG WITH IT.
> > [INDISTINCT SHOUTING]
> > WEAPONS CAPABLE OF HURLING
300-POUND PROJECTILES MANY MILES
WITH AMAZING ACCURACY.
"> > IN WARFARE, ACCURACY IS"
VITAL.
GROUND ARTILLERY TESTED ON THE
FORMER FARMLAND OF ABERDEEN
PROVING GROUND FUNCTIONED
DIFFERENTLY ON THE SANDS OF
AFRICAN BEACHES.
WITH NEWLY DEVELOPED WEAPONS
CONSTANTLY ROLLING OFF ASSEMBLY
"LINES, NEW BALLISTICS TABLES"
WERE DESPERATELY NEEDED.
THE PHILADELPHIA COMPUTING
SECTION PRODUCED INDIVIDUAL
SHELL TRAJECTORIES. THESE
CALCULATIONS WERE THEN SENT TO
ABERDEEN TO BE COMPILED INTO
"TABLES, PRINTED AND BOUND INTO"
"MANUALS, AND THE
MANUALS SHIPPED"
AROUND THE WORLD TO SOLDIERS IN
THE FIELD.
"> > WE WERE VERY
CLOSE, THOSE OF"
US ON THAT FLOOR.
"WE WERE PRETTY
CLOSE, AND WE DID"
TALK. WE WERE TOLD THAT THE GUNS
REACHED THE SOLDIERS BEFORE THE
"FIRING TABLES DID, AND WE FELT"
THAT IT WAS VERY IMPORTANT TO
GET THIS DONE AND OVER TO THEM.
> > WE KNEW THAT WHAT WE WERE
DOING WAS IMPORTANT AND THAT IT
WAS VERY SECRET AND THAT BEING
THERE WAS A GOOD THING.
> > WE USUALLY HAD ENOUGH WOMEN
WORKING THOSE 3 SHIFTS TO GET
"THE PROJECT DONE
IN TIME, BUT IF"
"WE WEREN'T FINISHED
IN TIME, WE"
DOUBLE-SHIFTED.
"> > NO, WE DIDN'T
HAVE VACATIONS,"
SO WE DIDN'T TAKE TIME OFF FROM
WORK. WE WORKED.
"WE WORKED ONE
SHIFT, TWO SHIFTS,"
"3 SHIFTS SOMETIMES, DEPENDING"
UPON WHAT WAS NEEDED.
"YEAH, IT WAS TOUGH."
"> > THIS IS
MISSION NUMBER ONE,"
"SEPTEMBER 19, 1944."
WE WERE SCHEDULED TO BOMB THE
"MARSHALLING YARDS,
THE RAILROAD"
"YARDS, INTO HAMM, GERMANY, BUT"
"WE ACTUALLY BOMBED OZBROOK,"
"GERMANY. IT WAS
A VISUAL TARGET,"
"AND WE WERE IN
THE FIRST GROUP,"
THE HIGH GROUP.
> > WE ASSEMBLED THROUGH TWO
"LAYERS OF CLOUDS,
1 ,000 TO 3,000"
"FEET AND THEN 5,000 TO 7,500,"
AND THEN GOT THE FORMATION
TOGETHER AND WERE
HEADEDTOWARDS
THE COAST.
IT WAS A WONDERFUL FEELING
SEEING ALL THE WINGS OF SHIPS
EVERYWHERE.
THE SKY WAS FULL OF US.
> > I JOINED NOT SO MUCH OUT OF
PATRIOTISM AS THE FACT THAT THE
DRAFT BOARD WAS BREATHING A HOT
BREATH ON MY NECK LIKE THE MOST
OF US GUYS IN 1942.
THEY SAID I WAS TOO SMALL TO BE
"A BOMBER PILOT,
AND I SAID, ''I"
"CAN HANDLE
ANYTHING,'' AND THEY"
"SAID, ''NO, YOU CAN'T.''"
"SO ANYWAY, I WOUND UP GOING TO"
BOMBARDIER AND NAVIGATION SCHOOL
AND GRADUATED AND WENT ON TO
JOIN UP WITH A CREW ON A B-1 7
FLYING FORTRESS.
"> > THE B-1 7, THE ARMY AIR"
CORPS' LEGENDARY ''FLYING
"FORTRESS,'' FLEW
WITH A CREW OF"
"10 MEN, IN MASSIVE FORMATIONS."
3 SQUADRONS OF 1 2 PLANES FORMED
A TYPICAL BOMBING GROUP.
"THESE GROUPS OF 36 PLANES,"
TAKING OFF FROM TEMPORARY
AIRBASES ON COUNTRY ESTATES ALL
"OVER ENGLAND, ASSEMBLED IN THE"
AIR FOR MISSIONS OVER THE
EUROPEAN CONTINENT.
FORMATIONS OF HUNDREDS OF PLANES
ASSURED THAT SOME WOULD EVADE
ANTI-AIRCRAFT FIRE AND REACH
THEIR TARGET.
CAREFUL AS BALLISTICS
"CALCULATIONS WERE, ''PRECISION"
BOMBING'' WAS NOT PERFECT.
AND SO MASSIVE FORMATIONS
CARPET-BOMBED TARGETED AREAS.
THE PILOT RELIED ON HIS
"BOMBARDIER, CROUCHED BEHIND A"
CLEAR PLASTIC BUBBLE IN THE NOSE
OF THE PLANE.
THE LEAD PLANE'S BOMBARDIER
OPERATED THE TECHNOLOGICALLY
SOPHISTICATED AND TOP-SECRET
"NORDEN BOMBSITE, AND WHEN HE"
"RELEASED HIS BOMBS, THIS WAS A"
SIGNAL TO THE OTHER BOMBARDIERS
TO RELEASE THEIRS.
> > SO OFF WE WENT.
FROM THE INITIAL POINT I WOULD
HAVE THE BOMB SITE.
"I WOULD LOOK IN, AND I WOULD"
ADJUST ONE KNOB SO THAT THE ONE
CROSS-HAIR WOULD BE ACTUALLY ON
THE TARGET.
THEN YOU'D THROW A BUTTON AND
THE OTHER INDEX WOULD COME UP.
"WHEN THESE TWO INDICES MET,"
THAT WAS BOMBS AWAY.
THESE FIGURES THAT YOU PUMPED
INTO THE BOMBSITE WERE THE
RESULT OF SOME DEAR PEOPLE BACK
IN THE STATES FIGURING USING A
COMPTOMETER AND A SLIDE RULE AND
THEY CAME UP WITH THESE
BALLISTIC FIGURES.
> > ONE OF THE PROBLEMS THEY HAD
IN WORLD WAR II WITH NORDEN
BOMBSITE AND BOMBING IN
PARTICULAR WAS THAT ALL THESE
TABLES HAD BEEN WORKED OUT IN
"PERFECT CLARITY
OF AIR, BUT WHEN"
"THEY WENT TO EUROPE, THE CLOUD"
COVER MOVED IN. THE AIR
"TEMPERATURE, AIR DENSITY ARE"
DIFFERENT.
SO THEY HAD IT WITHIN THE
"BALLPARK, BUT THEY DIDN'T HAVE"
IT EXACTLY.
SO IF YOU GOT A BOMB WITHIN 500
"YARDS OF A TARGET, YOU WERE"
"DOING REALLY GOOD, AND THAT'S"
WHY THEY USED THESE MASSIVE
FORMATIONS OF BOMBERS--
TO DROP HUGE AMOUNTS OF BOMBS ON
A TARGET TO MAKE SURE THEY HIT
THE TARGET.
"NOW, WHEN YOU DO
THAT, THERE'S A"
"LOT OF COLLATERAL
DAMAGE, AND IN"
"WORLD WAR II, YOU KNOW, A CITY"
BECOMES A TARGET.
"> > GEOGRAPHICALLY,
THERE WAS AN"
AREA RIGHT CLOSE TO THE
CONFLUENCE OF THE ENGLISH
CHANNEL AND THE NORTH SEA WHERE
THE R.A.F. COULD--
IF THEY CAME BACK WITH A LOAD OF
BOMBS--
COULDN'T DROP 'CAUSE IT WAS NOT
A GOOD IDEA TO GO TO WAR WITH
"8,000 POUNDS OF BOMBS."
COULDN'T DROP THEM?
COME BACK AND LAND WITH THEM.
EH...YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
SO THERE WAS THIS AREA THAT YOU
WOULD DROP THEM IN THE ENGLISH
CHANNEL.
"NOW, WHAT OUR POLICY USED TO"
BE--AND I GUESS THE LORD WILL
HOLD SOMEBODY RESPONSIBLE FOR
IT--FIND A TARGET OF
OPPORTUNITY.
IF BERLIN IS SO FOGGED IN YOU
"CAN'T GO, YOUR PRIMARY TARGET,"
FIND A TARGET OF OPPORTUNITY.
WE WERE GOING UP OVER THE NORTH
"SEA, OVER HELGOLAND, DOWN THE"
BALTIC AND INTO BERLIN THAT WAY.
COULDN'T GET IN--
"WE WERE UP TO
ABOUT 35,000 FEET,"
AND THE SERVICE
CEILING ON A B1 7
"WAS 36, AND THE
THING WAS FLYING"
PRACTICALLY LIKE THIS.
"AND WE GOT UP
OVER DENMARK, AND"
"THEN CAME BACK,
AND THAT WAS ONE"
OF THE TIMES WE DROPPED OUR
BOMBS ON A TARGET OF
"OPPORTUNITY, WHICH WAS A DEAR,"
LITTLE TOWN IN HOLLAND WHICH WE
SHOULDN'T HAVE DONE BUT WE DID.
> > ALLIED PATROLS ON THE ANZIO
FRONT BELOW ROME ARE IN CONSTANT
CONTACT WITH THE ENEMY.
TROOPS BLAZING AWAY WITHIN SIGHT
OF A NAZI OUTPOST.
> > WE HAD SOME BIG SHOTS FROM
WASHINGTON COME UP IN MILITARY
UNIFORMS--COLONELS OR GENERALS
OR WHATEVER THEY WERE--
TO GIVE US AN AWARD.
"IT WAS A PIECE OF PAPER, BUT I"
DON'T KNOW WHAT HAPPENED TO
"THOSE PIECES OF PAPER, BUT IT"
"WAS ONE FOR THE
WHOLE UNIT, YOU"
"KNOW, TELLING US
THAT THIS WAS A"
"MAJOR SUCCESS, A UNITED STATES"
VICTORY IN SOME PART OF EUROPE
AND ONE OF THEM WAS ANZIO.
> > THE BATTLE OF ANZIO IS AN
ATTEMPT TO OUTFLANK THE GERMANS.
"LAND IN BEHIND
THEIR LINES, GET"
"IN BEHIND THEM,
AND DISRUPT THEM"
AND FORCE THEM TO WITHDRAW.
UNFORTUNATELY IT'S NOT PRESSED
VIGOROUSLY ENOUGH.
THE GERMANS WERE ABLE TO REACT
"AND PIN US INTO
A BEACHHEAD, AND"
IT BECAME SORT OF A SHOOTING
GALLERY.
> > WHEN I READ
ABOUT THE LANDING
"ON THE BEACHES
AT ANZIO, IN THE"
"NEWSPAPERS, I GOT, YOU KNOW,"
PHYSICALLY ILL FROM THE
BLOODBATH THAT HAPPENED THERE.
"I MEAN, THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE WERE"
BLEEDING ON THE BEACHES.
"IT WAS ABSOLUTELY
HORRIBLE, THAT"
"LANDING, AND I THOUGHT ABOUT"
THAT FOR A LONG TIME.
I LOST SOME SLEEP OVER THAT.
> > WORLD WAR II GAVE BIRTH TO
THE MODERN MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL
"COMPLEX, A PARTNERSHIP OF"
"GOVERNMENT FUNDING, INDUSTRIAL"
"CAPACITY, AND UNIVERSITY"
BRAINPOWER THAT PRODUCED
ASTOUNDING TECHNOLOGICAL LEAPS.
THE ARMY WAS CONSTANTLY
DEVELOPING AND TESTING NEW
WEAPONS AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES AND
UNDER THE PRESSURE OF WAR WOULD
TRY ANYTHING.
THERE WAS A BOMB CONTAINING LIVE
BATS RIGGED WITH INCENDIARY
DEVICES--A $2 MILLION RESEARCH
PROJECT THAT WENT NOWHERE.
BUT THEN THERE WAS RADAR.
THERE WAS THE MANHATTAN PROJECT.
AND THERE WAS A CRAZY IDEA THAT
CAME OUT OF THE MOORE SCHOOL OF
ENGINEERING AT PENN.
> > THE ABERDEEN PEOPLE WERE
BUILDING UP THEIR STAFF.
ONE OF THE THINGS THEY DID WAS
TO RAKE OVER THE MATHEMATICAL
DIVISIONS IN VARIOUS COLLEGES.
AND ONE OF THE MEN THEY GOT WAS
HERMAN GOLDSTINE.
"HE WAS FROM CHICAGO, HE HAD A"
"Ph.D. IN MATHEMATICS, AND"
SHORTLY AFTER HE CAME ABOARD--
AND OF COURSE HE AND I WORKED
TOGETHER 'CAUSE HE WAS ALWAYS
"COMING TO SAY, ''HOW'S THE"
ANALYZER DOING?''
AND THE ANALYZER ROOM WAS DOWN
"IN THE BASEMENT,
AND THERE WERE"
TWO STEPS DOWN INTO THE PLACE
"WHERE THE ANALYZER WAS, AND SO"
YOU COULD STAND ON THIS TOP STEP
AND THEN LOOK DOWN ON
THE WHOLE SCENE.
AND HE AND I WERE STANDING
"THERE, AND HERMAN SAYS, ''YOU"
"KNOW, WHEN WE
GOT THIS THING IN"
"ABERDEEN, WE
THOUGHT IT WAS THE"
GREATEST THING SINCE BOTTLED
BEER. AND NOW IT SEEMS
SO DAMN SLOW.''
"AND I SAID, ''WELL,
YOU KNOW, YOU"
SHOULD TALK TO A GUY UPSTAIRS
NAMED JOHN MAUCHLY WHO HAS IDEAS
OF HOW TO DO IT
ELECTRONICALLY.''
"''OH, CAN I MEET HIM?''"
"I SAID, ''SURE.''"
> > JOHN MAUCHLY WAS A YOUNG
PHYSICS PROFESSOR RESEARCHING
WEATHER PREDICTION AT THE MOORE
"SCHOOL, AND J. PRESPER ECKERT"
WAS A BRILLIANT GRADUATE STUDENT
IN ENGINEERING.
"TO SPEED UP HIS CALCULATIONS,"
MAUCHLY HAD CONCEIVED OF A
"RADICAL NEW
MACHINE, AN ENTIRELY"
"ELECTRONIC, DIGITAL
CALCULATOR,"
AND ECKERT WANTED TO HELP BUILD
IT. BACK IN THE DESPERATE SPRING
"OF 1943, CAPTAIN HERMAN"
GOLDSTINE HAD ESCORTED MAUCHLY
AND ECKERT TO ABERDEEN PROVING
GROUND TO PITCH THEIR IDEA TO
THE ARMY BRASS.
THE TRIO OF EGGHEADS WAS ELATED
WHEN THE TRY-ANYTHING ARMY
AGREED TO FUND THEIR PROJECT.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF ENIAC--
THE ELECTRONIC NUMERICAL
INTEGRATOR AND COMPUTER--
WAS UNDERWAY.
> > WE KNEW THAT THESE TWO GUYS
WERE IN THIS ROOM RIGHT OFF THE
DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER ROOM AND
THAT THEY WERE INVENTING
"SOMETHING, BUT WE HAD NO IDEA"
WHAT THEY WERE INVENTING UNTIL
MUCH LATER WHEN THEY HAD THIS
"GREAT, BIG MACHINE UP AGAINST"
THE WALL AND LOTS OF LIGHTS AND
"WIRES COMING TO IT, AND THEY"
INVITED THE COUPLE OF US IN
"THERE AND SAID,
''YOU WANT TO SEE"
"SOMETHING?'' AND
THEY TOOK US IN,"
"AND WE SAID, ''WHAT'S THAT?''"
"AND THEY SAID,
''THAT'S GOING TO"
BE THE FIRST ELECTRONIC
"COMPUTER, AND
THAT'S GOING TO DO"
THE WORK THAT YOU'RE DOING IN
SECONDS.''
"AND SO WE SAID,
''YEAH, GO DREAM"
"ON, YOU CRAZY
GUYS,'' YOU KNOW?"
AND IT WAS ENIAC.
> > I DON'T KNOW THAT I THOUGHT
"IT WAS IMPORTANT, BUT I DIDN'T"
THINK IT WAS A FOLLY.
I THOUGHT IT WAS GOING TO COME
UP WITH THIS INFORMATION.
I DIDN'T REALIZE THAT IT COULD
BE USED IN CIVILIAN LIFE.
"I ASSUMED IT WAS, YOU KNOW,"
SOMETHING THAT THE ARMY WOULD
BE ABLE TO USE.
> > BULLETIN: SUPREME
HEADQUARTERS ALLIED
EXPEDITIONARY FORCE JUNE 6.
GENERAL DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER'S
HEADQUARTERS ANNOUNCED TODAY
THAT ALLIED TROOPS...
> > DESPITE THE SUCCESS OF THE
ALLIED INVASION OF EUROPE ON
"D-DAY, BY DECEMBER 1944, THE"
ALLIES SUFFER SETBACKS IN
BELGIUM DURING THE BATTLE OF THE
"BULGE, AND REALIZE
THAT THE WAR"
WITH HITLER WILL NOT END SOON.
"PROGRESS ON ENIAC IS SLOW, AND"
THE PHILADELPHIA COMPUTING
SECTION IS OVERWHELMED BY
DEMANDS FROM ABERDEEN FOR
BALLISTICS CALCULATIONS.
CAPTAIN GOLDSTINE AND THE MOORE
SCHOOL FACULTY NEED MORE FEMALE
COMPUTERS.
THEY LAUNCH A NEW RECRUITMENT
"EFFORT, WRITING
TO ASSOCIATIONS"
OF UNIVERSITY WOMEN AND TO
MATHEMATICS DEPARTMENTS ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
> > I GRADUATED IN COLLEGE IN
1945. I WAS LOOKING FOR OTHER
"THINGS, AND MY
CALCULUS TEACHER"
KNEW THAT I DIDN'T WANT TO TEACH
"SCHOOL, AND SHE
SAID, ''OH, THERE"
ARE LOTS OF THINGS YOU CAN DO.''
SHE HAD A RECRUITMENT LETTER
"FROM ABERDEEN PROVING GROUND,"
AND THEY WANTED GIRL MATH MAJORS
TO APPLY FOR A JOB AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
AT THE MOORE SCHOOL.
"WELL, I APPLIED
FOR A JOB, AND I"
"DIDN'T HEAR FROM
THEM, SO I WENT"
HOME TO WAIT FOR THIS GREAT JOB
"OFFER, AND THEN
MY FATHER WOULD"
COME HOME ALMOST EVERY DAY WITH
ANOTHER SCHOOL THAT NEEDED A
MATH TEACHER.
"I SAID, ''NO, I'M WAITING.''"
"AND PEOPLE WOULD ASK ME, YOU"
"KNOW, ''YOU WHAT
ARE YOU DOING?''"
''I'M WAITING.''
"AND WHEN THEY HIRED ME, THEY"
"SENT A TELEGRAM, AND IT SAID,"
''REPORT IMMEDIATELY!'' SO I WAS
ON THE WABASH THE NEXT MIDNIGHT
OUT OF TOWN.
"> > IT IS SPRING 1945, AND"
"PHILADELPHIA,
LIKE OTHER CITIES"
LARGE AND SMALL ACROSS THE
"UNITED STATES, BOOMS WITH"
WARTIME ACTIVITY.
THE NAVAL YARD BUILDS WARSHIPS;
CLOTHING FACTORIES PRODUCE
UNIFORMS; WAR WORKERS PACK
"CROWDED ROOMING
HOUSES, AND THE"
STREETS COME ALIVE IN THE OFF
HOURS.
"YOUNG PEOPLE, FAR
AWAY FROM HOME"
WITH GOOD WAGES IN THEIR
"POCKETS, ARE EXPERIENCING NEW"
FREEDOM.
"> > I THINK I
STARTED AT $1 ,280"
"OR $1 ,260 A
YEAR, AND THAT WAS"
FAIR PAY AT THAT TIME.
"AND THEN WHEN WE
MADE $1 ,800 A"
"YEAR, THAT WAS FANTASTIC."
"WE WENT UP IN RANK, AND I"
"THINK--I THINK UP TO 2,000."
> > WE WERE
CONSIDERED TO BE VERY
"HIGHLY PAID, AND WE DIDN'T PAY"
"MUCH ATTENTION TO THAT EITHER,"
BUT I REMEMBER HEARING MY MOTHER
BRAG ABOUT HOW MUCH MONEY WE
MADE WORKING OUT THERE IN THE
"UNIT, YOU KNOW?"
"MY MOTHER WOULD
SAY, ''GUESS WHAT"
THE GIRLS ARE
MAKING?'' YOU KNOW?
SHE COULD HARDLY BELIEVE IT.
WE HAD A NICE SOCIAL LIFE
SOMEHOW OR ANOTHER.
WE SQUEEZED THAT IN WITH ALL THE
OTHER ACTIVITIES.
> > WE DIDN'T
WORRY ABOUT THE MEN
IN OUR LIVES BECAUSE THERE
"WEREN'T ANY, AND WE ALL,"
"SO TO SPEAK, LET
OUR HAIR DOWN,"
AND WE DID WHATEVER WE FELT LIKE
"DOING, THAT WE COULD AFFORD TO"
"DO ON $2,000 A YEAR."
> > AND I REMEMBER HAVING
PICNICS. WE WOULD GO OUT ON A
PICNIC ON A SUNDAY EVERY ONCE IN
"A WHILE, AND WE HAD A LOT OF"
"FUN, AND WE'D TRIED TO FORGET"
ABOUT WHAT WE WERE DOING DURING
"THE WEEK, YOU KNOW, AND JUST"
HAVE A GOOD TIME.
> > SOMETIMES WHEN WE WERE THERE
"LATE ON SATURDAY
NIGHT, FLORENCE"
"USUALLY, BECAUSE SHE WAS VERY"
"GOOD AT IT, WOULD PUT WORDS TO"
"SONGS, TO TUNES, AND WE WOULD"
SING. ALL OF US WOULD HOLD THE
PAPERS AND SING.
I CAN'T SING. I CAN'T SING. I'LL
JUST MOUTH IT FOR YOU. IT WAS--
I'M TRYING TO THINK OF THE NAME
OF THE SONG. YOU WOULDN'T KNOW
THE TUNE ANYWAY.
IT WAS ''SATURDAY NIGHT AT PCS''
BECAUSE WE WERE THE PHILADELPHIA
COMPUTING SECTION.
THAT'S WHAT THEY CALLED US.
''SATURDAY NIGHT AT PCS
COMPUTERS WANT TO PLAY.
INSTEAD OF PUSHING THE MONROE
"KEYS, THIS IS
WHAT THEY SAY...''"
AND THEN WE WENT OFF FROM THERE.
"WHY, I REMEMBER THAT 60 YEARS"
"LATER, I CAN'T TELL YOU,"
BUT I DO.
> > PRESIDENT TRUMAN OFFICIALLY
ANNOUNCES THE END OF GERMAN
RESISTANCE.
> > GENERAL
EISENHOWER INFORMS ME
THAT THE FORCES OF GERMANY HAVE
SURRENDERED TO THE UNITED
NATIONS. THE FLAGS OF FREEDOM
FLY ALL OVER EUROPE.
> > VICTORY IN EUROPE BROUGHT
WILD REJOICING THROUGHOUT THE
ALLIED WORLD AS THE BIG 3
ANNOUNCED THE DOWNFALL OF NAZI
GERMANY...
> > I JUST REMEMBER THAT THE
ANNOUNCEMENT CAME OVER THE RADIO
"THAT THE WAR IN
EUROPE WAS OVER,"
"AND, OH, BO Y,
WE REALLY HAD THE"
TIME OF OUR LIVES.
WE WENT OUTSIDE AND DANCED IN
THE GARDENS AT PENN AND JUST HAD
A GREAT TIME CELEBRATING.
> > THERE'S A HARD ROAD AHEAD
BEFORE WE BRING JAPAN TO HER
"KNEES, AND IT'S
UP TO US TO GET"
BACK IN THE JOB UNTIL COMPLETE
VICTORY IS ASSURED.
> > WE WENT BACK TO THE OFFICE
BECAUSE THE WAR IN JAPAN WASN'T
"OVER YET, AND WE
DID NOT KNOW IF"
THE WORK WE WERE DOING WAS FOR
JAPAN OR FOR EUROPE.
WE HAD NO IDEA.
"> > AFTER V.E. DAY, THE WAR"
"EFFORT DIDN'T SLACKEN AT ALL,"
"REALLY, BECAUSE EVERYBODY"
BELIEVED THAT THE WAR WOULD
STILL GO ON FOR A LONG TIME
BECAUSE THE ISLAND HOPPING IN
THE SOUTH PACIFIC WAS REALLY
BLOODY. PEOPLE JUST THOUGHT IT
WAS GOING TO TAKE YEARS TO WIPE
THE JAPANESE OUT OF ALL
THESE ISLANDS.
"> > IN THE BATTLE OF OKINAWA,"
"THOUGH, IT HAD
BEEN DECIDED THAT"
WE NEEDED SOMETHING THAT COULD
TAKE OUT JAPANESE DEFENSES ON
WHAT WAS KNOW AS THE ''REVERSE
"SLOPE,'' AND REMEMBER, THE"
JAPANESE DIDN'T GIVE UP.
THEY FOUGHT TO THE LAST.
"SO THERE'S ALSO, THEN, THE"
REALIZATION THAT IF WE INVADE
"JAPAN, WE'RE GOING TO USE"
CHEMICALS ON THEM.
WE'RE GOING TO USE MUSTARD GAS
ON THEM. SO THERE HAD TO BE AN
ENTIRE NEW COLLECTION EFFORT
MADE ON BALLISTIC TABLES FOR
THINGS LIKE MUSTARD GAS WEAPONS.
THIS WAS GOING TO TURN INTO A
VERY NASTY AFFAIR IF WE HAD TO
INVADE JAPAN.
> > THE JAPANESE TROOPS WERE IN
"TRENCHES, AND I REMEMBER"
DISCUSSING WITH THE GUYS--
THE BOSSES WHO WERE IN CHARGE OF
GETTING THIS WORK OUT--
THAT THERE WERE 3 DIFFERENT
POSITIONS AND THAT THERE WERE 3
DIFFERENT FORMULA THAT WE WERE
"USING THEN, AND
ONE OF THEM WAS"
"IF THEY WERE IN
PRONE POSITION,"
"STANDING POSITION, OR IF THEY"
WERE LYING FLAT.
"AND THAT KIND OF GOT TO ME, I"
THINK THAT'S WHY I REMEMBER IT
"SO CLEARLY, BECAUSE
THEN IT MADE"
"IT MORE PERSONAL, YOU KNOW?"
"I MEAN I THOUGHT,
''MY GOD, WHAT"
ARE WE DOING HERE?''
"> > AFTER THE WAR,
WE DID GO OVER"
"TO GERMANY, AND I SAW CHAPELS"
AND CATHEDRALS AND SO FORTH AND
TOWNS THAT HAD BEEN BOMBED BY
"US, SOME OF THE
THINGS I WAS ON."
"AND I THOUGHT, ''BO Y, THAT'S"
HORRIBLE.''
"AND WHEN WE CAME BACK, WE CAME"
BACK AND WENT TO AN AMERICAN
"CEMETERY, AND ALL I COULD"
"THINK OF WAS,
''THOSE BASTARDS,"
THEY DESERVED IT.''
"> > FOR MANY, MANY YEARS, EVEN"
"WHEN THE CHILDREN, MY OLDER"
"CHILDREN, WERE CERTAINLY OLD"
ENOUGH TO UNDERSTAND WHAT WE DID
"DURING THE WAR EFFORT, I NEVER"
DISCUSSED IT WITH THEM.
I NEVER MENTIONED BALLISTICS.
I NEVER MENTIONED THE UNIT
OR ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
AND IT KIND OF CAME AS A
SURPRISE TO THEM WHEN WE FINALLY
OPENED UP AND TOLD THEM WHAT WE
DID DURING THE WAR.
I STILL DON'T FEEL LIKE THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT I COULD KIND OF
"BRAG ABOUT, YOU KNOW?"
THIS WAS A TOUGH THING TO GET
"YOUR MIND SET
ON, YOU KNOW, AND"
TO ACCEPT FOR YOURSELF.
> > I'M A DIFFERENT MAN THAN I
"WAS 60 YEARS AGO. I MEAN,"
REALLY. I LIKE TO THINK THAT I'M
A BETTER MAN MORALLY.
I'M NOT AN OVERLY RELIGIOUS GUY.
I DO GO TO CHURCH EVERY SUNDAY.
I HAPPEN TO BE ROMAN CATHOLIC
BECAUSE MY WIFE WAS.
"AND IT WAS A JOB, YOU KNOW?"
"CERTAINLY, YEARS LATER I'M NOT"
PROUD OF IT.
I HAVE HAD THOUGHTS RUN THROUGH
MY MIND OCCASIONALLY.
WHEN MY DAY IS TO GO TO SAINT
"PETER, AND I SAY,
''HERE I AM,''"
AND HE GETS THE BOOK OUT AND
"SAYS, ''WELL...''"
I'M JUST WONDERING HOW MANY
SOULS I WOULD BE PERSONALLY
"RESPONSIBLE FOR, PARTICULARLY"
HAVING BEEN A LEAD BOMBARDIER.
"I DON'T KNOW. I
MEAN, IT'S DONE."
IT'S HAPPENED. THERE'S NOTHING I
CAN DO ABOUT IT.
"REMEMBER, I WAS
NOT AN INFANTRY"
MAN. I NEVER FACED A GUY LIKE
"YOU, YOU, AND YOU AND SHOT AND"
STABBED YOU.
I WAS 5 MILES UP MESSING AROUND
WITH A BUNCH OF LEVERS AS IF I
MIGHT BE WORKING IN A MACHINE
"SHOP. PUSH THE
LEVER, LIKE AS IF"
I WAS TURNING OFF A LIGHT.
AND IT WASN'T THE SAME EFFECT AS
ONE-ON-ONE.
BUT THERE WERE A FEW TIMES THAT
"YOU CAN'T HELP BUT THINK THAT,"
BUT YOU DON'T DWELL ON IT.
> > PROGRAMMING DID NOT EXIST
BEFORE THE 1940s BECAUSE HERE
"WERE NO COMPUTERS, EXCEPT FOR"
HUMAN COMPUTERS.
AND WHEN THE ARMY DECIDED TO
CREATE A MACHINE TO AUTOMATE THE
SAME COMPUTING WORK THAT WAS
DONE BY HUMANS BECAUSE THIS
"LABOR WAS DONE
BY FEMALES, ONCE"
THE ACTUAL MACHINE WAS DESIGNED
LARGELY BY MALE ENGINEERS
WORKING FOR THE ARMY AND WORKING
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
"PENNSYLVANIA,
SOMEONE'S WORK WAS"
NEEDED TO SET UP PROBLEMS ON THE
MACHINE. THIS WAS THE WORK OF
"THE FIRST PROGRAMMERS,"
AND BECAUSE WOMEN HAD BEEN
PRIMARILY ENGAGED IN THE HUMAN
"COMPUTING WORK, THEY WERE"
INVITED TO PROGRAM THE FIRST
MACHINE.
"> > WELL, HERMAN
WAS THE ONE THAT"
INTERVIEWED US FOR THE ENIAC.
"NOW, I HAD ONLY BEEN HERE--I"
"CAME THE 30th OF APRIL, SO IT"
WAS IN JUNE WHEN THEY WERE
RECRUITING PEOPLE AS PROGRAMMERS
FOR THE ENIAC.
SO THERE WAS A NOTICE CAME
AROUND THAT ANYBODY THAT WOULD
WANT TO BE A PROGRAMMER COULD
COME TO THIS MEETING ON A
PARTICULAR DAY FOR AN INTERVIEW
"FOR IT, SO 13 OF US SHOWED UP."
> > THE FIELD OF ELECTRONIC
COMPUTING IS SO NEW THAT CAPTAIN
GOLDSTINE HARDLY KNOWS WHAT TO
ASK THE APPLICANTS IN THEIR
INTERVIEWS.
BECAUSE THEY WILL BE HANDLING
"PLUGS, CABLES,
AND SWITCHES, HE"
FINALLY ASKS THEM IF THEY ARE
AFRAID OF ELECTRICITY.
"FROM THIS PROCESS, 6 WOMEN ARE"
"CHOSEN, BUT THEY
CANNOT SEE THE"
CLASSIFIED ENIAC UNTIL THE WAR
DEPARTMENT UPGRADES THEIR
SECURITY CLEARANCE.
AS THE SUMMER OF 1945 COMES TO A
"CLOSE, THEY TEACH
THEMSELVES HOW"
TO PROGRAM THE FIRST COMPUTER BY
STUDYING BLOCK DIAGRAMS.
"> > WELL, THERE
WERE ABOUT 18,000"
"VACUUM TUBES, AND IT HAD 20"
"ACCUMULATORS, AND EACH"
ACCUMULATOR HAD 10 DECADE
COUNTERS AND ONE SIGN COUNTER.
AND I CAN REMEMBER THE DAY THAT
WE FIGURED OUT HOW THE MASTER
PROGRAMMER WORKS.
"WE WERE WONDERING,
''HOW CAN YOU"
FIT ALL THIS STUFF ON HERE?''
"AND KAY POPPING UP AND SAYING,"
''AH! YOU CAN REPEAT IT! YOU CAN
USE THE MASTER PROGRAMMER!''
> > THE LABOR OF SETTING UP
PROBLEMS ON THE MACHINE WAS
CONCEIVED OF BY
PROJECT ENGINEERS AS LARGELY
"CLERICAL, NOT THAT IMPORTANT,"
BUT WHEN WE ACTUALLY LOOK IN
DETAIL AT WHAT THESE FIRST
"PROGRAMMERS WERE DOING, WE SEE"
IT REQUIRED FAMILIARITY WITH A
COMPLETELY UNTESTED MACHINE.
THEY WERE THE ONES WHO MADE THE
MACHINE WORK.
> > RUTH AND MARLYN
WERE ASSIGNED
THE JOB OF CALCULATING A
TRAJECTORY EXACTLY THE SAME WAY
"THE ENIAC DID, SO WE HAD THE"
TEST PROGRAM.
"WHAT WE WOULD DO, WE WOULD RUN"
THE TEST TRAJECTORY AND IF IT
"CAME OUT OK, THEN WE WOULD RUN"
"THE REAL TRAJECTORY,
AND THEN WE"
WOULD RUN THE TEST TRAJECTORY
"AGAIN, AND IF BOTH TEST"
"TRAJECTORIES CAME
OUT ALL RIGHT,"
WE ASSUMED WHAT WAS IN BETWEEN
WOULD. THIS TRAJECTORY THAT
MARLYN AND RUTH DID IS WHAT GAVE
US USEFULNESS IN THE EYES OF THE
"ENGINEERS, BECAUSE WITH THIS"
"PROGRAM, WE COULD DEBUG THE"
ENIAC DOWN TO A VACUUM TUBE.
"> > SO IN SOME
WAYS, PROGRAMMING"
THE ENIAC IS NOT AT ALL LIKE
PROGRAMMING A MODERN COMPUTER.
THE ENIAC WAS SEVERAL DIFFERENT
"MACHINES, AND IN SOME WAYS"
PROGRAMMING MEANT PLUGGING ONE
MACHINE INTO ANOTHER IN A PATH
THAT WOULD SOLVE YOUR PARTICULAR
"PROBLEM, AND
PROGRAMMINGBECOMES"
MUCH MORE THAN THAT AS COMPUTERS
BECOME MORE FLEXIBLE.
"ON THE OTHER HAND,
I DO THINK IT"
WAS UNDERESTIMATED BOTH AT THE
TIME AND TODAY.
SO IF YOU TALK TO SOMEBODY LIKE
"JEAN BARTIK, SHE WILL TELL YOU"
THE IMPORTANT ROLE SHE HAD IN
DEBUGGING THE SYSTEM--
FIGURING OUT WHAT WAS WRONG--
AND VERY QUICKLY I THINK PEOPLE
REALIZED THAT IT'S NOT JUST THE
MACHINE; IT'S THE MACHINE PLUS
THE PROGRAM THAT SOLVES THE
"PROBLEM, AND YOU CAN'T EASILY"
SEPARATE THE TWO IN THE WAY THAT
THE ENIAC PROJECT LEADERS HAD
HOPED THEY COULD.
> > A LOT OF US GOT TOGETHER AND
SAID OUR COUNTRY WOULDN'T DO
ANYTHING LIKE THAT ON SOMEBODY
"ELSE'S LAND, DROP SOMETHING"
THAT'S THAT DANGEROUS TO THE
PEOPLE THAT COULD POSSIBLY GO ON
"FOR GENERATIONS, YOU KNOW."
''OUR COUNTRY WOULDN'T DO THAT.
IT MUST HAVE BEEN SOMEBODY ELSE
WHO DID IT.''
WE DIDN'T BELIEVE THAT THE
UNITED STATES WOULD DROP
THE ATOMIC BOMB.
> > IT SCARED ME.
I WAS VERY FRIGHTENED AT THE
WHOLE IDEA OF THE ATOMIC BOMB.
I DON'T RECALL FEELING REGRET
"THAT THEY HAD
USED IT, HOWEVER."
I HAD MIXED FEELINGS ABOUT THAT.
> > THE LONG WORLD
WAR IS FINALLY
"OVER, BUT A NEW WAR IS"
"BEGINNING, A COLD WAR, FUELED"
BY A NUCLEAR ARMS RACE BETWEEN
FORMER ALLIES.
WHILE ENIAC WAS NOT COMPLETED IN
TIME TO CONTRIBUTE TO WORLD WAR
"II, THE SCIENTISTS
WHO DEVELOPED"
THE ATOMIC BOMB RECOGNIZE THAT
ITS UNPRECEDENTED CALCULATING
POWER CAN SPEED THEIR RESEARCH
INTO THE NEXT GENERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
TWO MEMBERS OF J. ROBERT
OPPENHEIMER'S LOS ALAMOS TEAM
TRAVEL FROM NEW MEXICO TO
PHILADELPHIA TO RUN A COMPLEX
PROBLEM ON ENIAC.
THIS HIGHLY CLASSIFIED PROBLEM
INVOLVED CALCULATIONS FOR A
NUCLEAR TRIGGER FOR THE HYDROGEN
BOMB.
"THIS FIRST, TRIUMPHANT TEST OF"
ENIAC THRILLS THE LOS ALAMOS
SCIENTISTS.
"AT THIS MOMENT,
TWO OF THE U.S."
ARMY'S MOST TOP-SECRET
AND WILDLY SPECULATIVE WORLD WAR
II PROJECTS CONVERGE.
> > TWO MEN CAME FROM LOS
ALAMOS--STAN FRANKEL AND NICK
"METROPOLIS, AND THEY HAD"
PROGRAMMED A PROBLEM TO RUN ON
THE ENIAC. THEY HAD BEEN THERE
AND TALKED TO THE ENGINEERS AND
HAD GOTTEN THE DRAWINGS ALSO.
"SO THEY CAME WITH
THEIR PROBLEM,"
AND FRAN AND KAY WORKED WITH
"THEM, AND THE
FIRST TIME WE SAW"
THE ENIAC WAS THE DAY WE PUT
"NICK AND STAN'S PROBLEM ON IT,"
AND HERMAN GOLDSTINE STOOD OUT
IN THE MIDDLE LIKE A CONDUCTOR
"OF AN ORCHESTRA, AND HE CALLED"
"OUT, ''ACCUMULATOR
20, SWITCH 1 ,"
"RECEIVE ON ALPHA
DIGIT TRAY, AND"
THE PROGRAM PULSE A-1 .''
"SO ANYWAY, WE
ALL WERE ASSIGNED"
"UNITS, AND WE'D STAND BY THE"
UNITS AND DID EXACTLY WHATEVER
HE TOLD US TO DO.
AND THAT'S HOW WE INSTALLED THAT
FIRST PROGRAM ON THE ENIAC.
"> > IN 1945, FRANKEL AND"
METROPOLIS CAME TO PENN TO SEE
IF THE ENIAC MIGHT BE USED TO
HELP THEM WITH THE CALCULATIONS
FOR CREATING THIS WEAPON.
AND WHO WAS IT WHO HELPED THEM
OUT? IT WAS THE WOMEN.
THIS WAS THE FIRST TIME THE
"MACHINE HAD EVER BEEN USED, SO"
THERE IS NO QUESTION THAT THEY
WERE DOING PIONEERING
AND IMPORTANT WORK.
> > IT WAS ANNOUNCED
TO THE PRESS
"ON THE FIRST OF FEBRUARY, BUT"
THEY WERE NOT ALLOWED TO
ANNOUNCE IT IN THEIR PAPERS
UNTIL THE FORMAL INTRODUCTION ON
THE 1 4th.
WHILE I UNDERSTAND THAT THE
DEMONSTRATION WAS PRETTY DISMAL
AND RIGHT AFTERWARD HERMAN
GOLDSTINE INVITED BETTY AND ME
OVER TO THEIR APARTMENT IN WEST
PHILADELPHIA.
HE ASKED IF THE TRAJECTORY WOULD
BE READY TO GO FOR THE
"DEMONSTRATION ON
THE 1 4th, IF WE"
"COULD GET EVERYTHING, AND WE"
"SAID, ''YES!'' WE'D NEVER"
"PROGRAMMED A PROBLEM, SO WHAT"
DID WE KNOW HOW MUCH TROUBLE WE
WERE GOING TO HAVE?
"BETTY AND I, WE
WORKED NIGHT AND"
DAY SO EVERYTHING WAS HUNKY-DORY
UNTIL THE NIGHT BEFORE THE
DEMONSTRATION. THE SHELL DIDN'T
STOP WHEN IT HIT THE GROUND.
IT DUG A HOLE.
WE COULDN'T FIGURE OUT WHAT ON
EARTH WAS GOING WRONG.
SO I'VE ALWAYS SAID THAT BETTY
USES MORE LOGIC IN HER SLEEP
THAN MOST PEOPLE DO AWAKE.
SO THAT NIGHT SHE HAD HER
"NIGHTTIME LOGIC
WORKING, AND THE"
NEXT MORNING SHE CAME IN AND
KNEW EXACTLY WHICH SWITCH ON THE
MASTER PROGRAMMER TO CHANGE AND
TO STOP IT WHEN IT HIT THE
"GROUND, SO IT WAS A FANTASTIC"
DEMONSTRATION.
> > PHOTOGRAPHERS
AND JOURNALISTS
WERE INVITED ON SEVERAL
OCCASIONS TO COME IN AND SEE
"WHAT EXACTLY WAS
THE ENIAC, WHAT"
"COULD IT DO, WHO WAS INVOLVED,"
AND ARCHIVAL RECORDS SHOW THAT
WOMEN WERE PHOTOGRAPHED BUT
THESE PHOTOGRAPHS NEVER APPEARED
IN ARTICLES WRITTEN BY THE
JOURNALISTS OR NEVER WERE
PUBLISHED IN NEWSPAPERS AND
MAGAZINES.
SO MANY OF THE MEN--ENGINEERS--
RECEIVED PUBLICITY WHILE THE
FEMALE COMPUTERS
ANDPROGRAMMERS
DID NOT.
AS FAR AS THE OFFICIAL PUBLICITY
THAT WAS STAGED IN FEBRUARY
"1946, THAT WAS
ORGANIZED BY THE"
WAR DEPARTMENT AND PRETTY
TIGHTLY CONTROLLED IN TERMS OF
WHAT JOURNALISTS AND OTHER
PEOPLE ATTENDING SAW.
BETTY JEAN JENNINGS AND BETTY
SNYDER DEVELOPED THE
DEMONSTRATION TRAJECTORY
PROGRAM.
"AGAIN, THEY WERE THE ONES WHO"
MADE THE MACHINE DO THE THINGS
THAT WE ALL GOT VERY EXCITED
"ABOUT, BUT THEIR PARTICIPATION"
WAS NEVER MENTIONED IN EITHER
WAR DEPARTMENT PRESS RELEASES OR
LATER NEWS REPORTS THAT RELIED
ON THOSE PUBLICITY MATERIALS.
> > I THINK THAT WORLD WAR II's
BIGGEST IMPACT ON WOMEN WAS A
PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPACT--
THE ABILITY TO DO SOMETHING THAT
YOU WERE TOLD YOU WOULD NEVER BE
"ABLE TO DO, THAT YOU COULDN'T"
"DO, THAT YOU WERE INCAPABLE OF"
"DOING, AND FOR WOMEN, WHETHER"
"WORKING AS ENGINEERS, AS"
"MATHEMATICIANS, OR AS WELDERS,"
THEY LEARNED SOMETHING ABOUT
THEMSELVES THAT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT.
"> > THESE COMPUTERS,
THESE LADIES"
THAT COMPUTED THESE FIRING
"TABLES, IT WAS
ABSOLUTELY VITAL"
"WORK, AND WITHOUT THEIR"
"CONTRIBUTION TO
THE WAR EFFORT,"
WE WOULD HAVE LOST WORLD WAR II.
WE COULD NOT HAVE WON WORLD WAR
II WITHOUT THAT DATA.
> > I WAS AT A
MUSEUM THAT HAD AN
EXHIBIT ABOUT THE ENIAC
"RECENTLY, AND IT HAD A VERY"
TRADITIONAL PICTURE. IT HAD
"ECKERT AND MAUCHLY,
AND THEN IT"
HAD THIS LABEL AND THE ''ENIAC
"WOMEN,'' AND I
TOLD THE CURATOR"
"OF THAT EXHIBIT, ''WE'VE KNOWN"
FOR A LONG TIME WHO THESE WOMEN
ARE.
THEY'RE A CRUCIAL PART OF THIS
STORY. YOU NEED TO CHANGE THE
LABEL ON THIS BECAUSE THEY ARE
SO IMPORTANT.''
"BUT THIS WAS A FEW YEARS AGO,"
AND THEIR STORY HAS STILL BEEN
NEGLECTED.
"> > FOR WHATEVER REASON, THOSE"
"WERE VERY HAPPY YEARS FOR US,"
AND IT SHOULDN'T HAVE BEEN BUT
IT WAS. WE WERE EXTREMELY HAPPY
DOING WHATEVER WE WERE DOING AT
THAT TIME.
> > I'M GLAD WE HAD THE SKILLS
AND THAT THEY DRAGGED US IN
"THERE AND SAID GO DO IT, YOU"
KNOW? I'M GLAD WE WERE ABLE TO
"HELP THAT MUCH,
AND NOT ONLY THE"
"TWO OF US, BUT ALL THOSE OTHER"
WONDERFUL WOMEN WHO CAME IN AND
DID THAT WORK.
"> > WELL, I'VE
ALWAYS SAID THAT I"
WAS THE LUCKIEST PERSON IN THE
WORLD BECAUSE OF WORKING ON THE
ENIAC WITH THESE WOMEN THAT I
REALLY CAME TO LOVE AND ADMIRE
AND RESPECT AND I HAD SO MUCH
FUN WITH THEM. AND I ALSO FEEL
THAT I WAS LUCKY TO HAVE MET
JOHN MAUCHLY AND PRES ECKERT WHO
GAVE MY LIFE A MEANING THAT IT
COULD NEVER HAVE HAD IN ANY
OTHER WAY.
"> > DURING WORLD WAR II, ALL"
"ACROSS AMERICA, WOMEN ANSWERED"
THE CALL TO HELP THE WAR EFFORT.
ROSIE THE RIVETER AND FEMALE
MILITARY UNITS SUCH AS THE WACS
AND THE WAVES WERE PUBLICLY
"CELEBRATED FOR
DOING THEIR BIT,"
AND THEIR HEROICS LIVE ON IN
"MONUMENTS, MOVIES, AND LORE."
BUT THE WOMEN WHO TOILED ON
CLASSIFIED PROJECTS IN OBSCURE
AND OFTEN MAKESHIFT LABS
FAITHFULLY KEPT THEIR SECRETS.
THESE YOUNG WOMEN WORKED AS
"CODEBREAKERS, BALLISTICS"
"CALCULATORS, AND MACHINE"
PROGRAMMERS.
THEY DID NOT SEEK RECOGNITION OR
"GLORY, AND MANY OF THEIR NAMES"
ARE LOST TO HISTORY.
BUT EVERY DAY THAT A YOUNG WOMAN
WALKS THROUGH A DOOR THAT THEY
"OPENED, THE LEGACY OF THESE"
WOMEN LIVES ON.
> > IT'S A DAY THEY'VE BEEN
WAITING FOR. THEY'RE THE FIRST
GROUP TO BE RELEASED BY THE NAVY
UNDER THE POINT SYSTEM.
"THANKS, MATES, FOR A JOB WELL"
"DONE. WITH PEACE, HUNDREDS OF"
THOUSANDS THROUGHOUT
THECOUNTRY
LEFT WAR PLANTS FOR THE LAST
"TIME, AND NOW WE FACE THE"
PROBLEM OF RECONVERTING
FACTORIES. AT UNITED STATES
EMPLO YMENT OFFICES THROUGHOUT
"THE COUNTRY,
FORMER WAR WORKERS"
LINE UP TO REGISTER FOR NEW
JOBS. WITH GAS AGAIN PLENTIFUL
AND WITH NEW CARS AND NEW TIRES
"ON THE WAY, AMERICA WILL BE"
ROLLING WITH A PRE-WAR FLOURISH.
YES...
"> > AFTER THE WAR, RETURNING"
G.I.s DISPLACED MOST OF THE
"BLUE-COLLAR ROSIES
WHO, LIKE IT"
"OR NOT, WENT BACK TO PRE-WAR"
JOBS AND ROLES. BUT THEIR
COMPUTING SISTERS HAD MORE
OPTIONS. MARLYN WESCOFF WORKED
ON ENIAC UNTIL IT WAS MOVED TO
ABERDEEN PROVING GROUND AT THE
END OF 1946.
SHE OPTED TO HELP HER NEW
HUSBAND ESTABLISH HIS DENTAL
"PRACTICE IN
TRENTON, NEW JERSEY,"
"AND MANAGED THE
OFFICE, RAISING"
TWO CHILDREN ALONG THE WAY.
"IN 1997, MARLYN,
ALONG WITH ALL"
"OF THE ENIAC PROGRAMMERS, WAS"
INDUCTED INTO THE WOMEN IN
TECHNOLOGY HALL OF FAME.
ONE OF HER PROUDEST MOMENTS CAME
WHEN HER GRANDSON RECEIVED AN
''A'' FOR HIS PAPER ABOUT HIS
GRANDMOTHER'S WORK ON ENIAC.
MARLYN WESCOFF MELTZER DIED
IN 2008.
"AFTER THE WAR,
SHIRLEY BLUMBERG"
MARRIED A PHOTOGRAPHER AND
ASSISTED AT HIS PHILADELPHIA
STUDIO UNTIL THE FRANKLIN
INSTITUTE TAPPED HER TO WORK AS
A MATHEMATICIAN ON AN AIRCRAFT
PROJECT. ONCE THE PROJECT WAS
"COMPLETED, SHIRLEY LEFT"
MATHEMATICS BEHIND TO RAISE HER
3 DAUGHTERS.
"IN 194 7, DORIS
BLUMBERG MARRIED"
AND FOLLOWED HER HUSBAND AS HE
ESTABLISHED A TEACHING CAREER.
SHE HAD 5 CHILDREN DURING THESE
"YEARS, FINALLY
SETTLING BACK IN"
PHILADELPHIA WHERE THE SISTERS
RAISED THEIR FAMILIES.
"IN 1965, DORIS AND SHIRLEY"
"FORMED TWIN REALTY, THE FIRST"
WOMAN-OWNED REAL ESTATE COMPANY
IN PHILADELPHIA.
THEY WERE ADVOCATES OF
NEIGHBORHOOD INTEGRATION AND
HELPED TO FOUND COMMUNITY AND
"ARTS ASSOCIATIONS, RECEIVING"
MANY CIVIC COMMENDATIONS ALONG
THE WAY.
"SHIRLEY MELVIN DIED IN 2009,"
LEAVING HER BELOVED SISTER DORIS
TO CONTINUE ON AS THE MATRIARCH
OF THEIR EXTENDED FAMILIES.
JEAN JENNINGS MOVED WITH ENIAC
TO ABERDEEN BUT IN 1948 WAS
HIRED BY JOHN MAUCHLY FOR AN
EVEN GREATER CHALLENGE--
TO PROGRAM THE UNIVAC AND BINAC
COMPUTERS FOR THE NEWLY FORMED
ECKERT MAUCHLY COMPUTER
CORPORATION.
THROUGHOUT HER DISTINGUISHED
"CAREER, SHE WORKED FOR MAJOR"
"COMPUTER COMPANIES, RECEIVING"
MANY AWARDS FOR HER WORK AS A
COMPUTER PIONEER.
JEAN JENNINGS BARTIK LIVES IN
"COLLINGSWOOD, NEW JERSEY, AND"
TRAVELS FREQUENTLY TO LECTURE ON
COMPUTER HISTORY BUT MAINTAINS
THAT HER GREATEST PERSONAL
ACCOMPLISHMENTS ARE HER
"CHILDREN, GRANDCHILDREN,"